THE HEIKE MONOGATARI. 
 
VOLUME 1. 
CHAPTER I. 
GION SHOJA.  
 
 
The sound of the bell of Gionshoja [1] echoes the impermanence of all things.  The hue of the flowers 
of the teak [2] tree declares that they who flourish must be brought low. Yea, the proud ones are but 
for a moment, like an evening dream in springtime.  The mighty are destroyed at the last, they are 
but as the dust before the wind. 
 
If thou ask concerning the rulers of other countries far off; Choko [3] of Shin, Ono [4] of Kan, 
Shui [5] of Ryo, Rokuzan [6] of To, all these, not following in the paths of the government of all 
the King and Emperors who went before them, sought pleasure only ; not entering into council 
nor heeding the disorders of their Country, having no knowledge of the affliction of their people, 
they did not endure, but perished utterly. So also if thou enquire concerning our own 
 
[p.2] 
 
country, Masakado [7] in the period Shohei, Sumitomo in Tenkyo, Gishin in Kowa, Shinrai in 
Heiji, all were arrogant and bold of heart in divers manners, yet if we consider what is told of the 
former Prime Minister Prince Taira no Ason Kiyomori, the Lay priest of Rokuhara, of a more 
recent time, neither in their words nor their intentions were they his equal. 
 
As to his ancestry he was the eldest son of Ason Tadamori chief of the department of justice ; 
grandson of Masamori Sanuki no Kami, who was descended in the ninth generation from 
Katsurabara Shinno, Prince of the first rank and chief of the department of Ceremonies, the fifth 
son of the Emperor Kwammu. This prince's son Takami no O had died without either office or 
rank and it was his son Takamimochi-no O who first received the surname of Taira, and before 
receiving the office of Kazusa-no-suke he suddenly gave up his royal rank and became a subject. 
His son Chinjufu Shogun Yoshimochi. afterwards changed his name to Kunika and from this 
Kunika to Masamori : these six generations, though always receiving government stipends, yet 
had not such rank as permitted them to appear at Court.  
 
 
CHAPTER II. 
 
THE ASSASINATION AT COURT.  
 
 
Now Tadamori, while holding the office of Bizen no Kami, by the request of the retired Emperor 
Toba, had built the temple Toku-cho-juin and the Sa-ju-san-gen-do, or hall 33 ken long, within 
which were one thousand and one, Buddhas; its first festival being on the thirteenth day of the 
third month of the first year of Tensho. As a reward he was honoured by receiving the territory 
of the province of Tamba, which then happened to be unappropriated. Moreover the Emperor of 
his bounty graciously permitted him to attend the Court ; which Tadamori did for the first time 
at the age of thirty six. But 
 
[p.3] 
 
the higher Courtiers were furious with jealousy and plotted to assassinate him on the evening of 
the festival of Go-Sechi [2] Toyo-no-akari-no-setchie, on the 23rd day of the eleventh month of 
the same year. Tadamori, who was not a civil official, being born of a line of warriors, on hearing 
of this was troubled in his heart for himself and his house at this unexpected shame that was 
come upon him, but finally, as he was in duty bound to serve his August Master under all 
conditions, he made his preparations beforehand. Before entering the Court he provided himself 
with a long dirk [1] which he girt on under his long court dress, and turning aside to a dimly lit 
place, slowly drew the blade, and passed it through the hair of his head so that it gleamed afar off 
with an icy sheen, causing all to stare open-eyed. Moreover a retainer of Tadamori, by birth of the 
same family, a grandson of Taira no Mokunosuke Sadamitsu and son of Shinno Saburodaiyu 
Iefusa, Sahyoe-no-jo Iesada by name, wearing a body armour laced with bright green under a light 
green "kariginu" [3] or loose overdress, and carrying under his arm a "tachi" [4] with a bowstring 
bag attached, was waiting in the "koniwa," the small court by the Seiryoden. 
 
Now the Kurando-no-to [5] or Chief of the Record Office and some underlings of his, thinking it 
strange that one wearing 
 
[p.4] 
 
unsuitable costume should be within the balustrade of the steps of the Court near the bell-rope 
of the library, and wondering if he was not some disorderly fellow, an official of the sixth rank 
ordered him to depart quickly. But Iesada thus replied : 
 
"Because I have heard that to-night they will try to kill my Lord Bizen-no-kami dono have I come 
hither"; and he remained there and did not depart. And they saw that there was nothing more to 
be done ; and thus the attempt did not take place. 
 
But when Tadamori danced in the August presence of the Mikado at his Imperial wish, the 
others mocked at him, changing the words of the music and singing " Ise heiji wa sugame nari," 
("the winepot of Ise has turned into a vinegar jar.") In thus mentioning the vessels of his province 
they punned on his title of Ise-heishi; and since Tadamori had a squint in one eye (sugame) they 
also alluded to this in the lampoon. Tadamori. not being able to do anything, left the Presence 
before the entertainment had ended, and going behind the Shishinden, a place that could be seen 
by everyone, deposited the sword that he was carrying at his side in the hands of the Tonomo-no-
tsukasa. Iesada, who was waiting for his lord, immediately asked him what had happened , but he, 
though greatly wishing to tell him, seeing in his face the expression of one who would even do 
violence in the Palace itself should he tell him the truth, merely answered that nothing out of the 
common had taken place. 
 
In the Go-setchie festival only such pleasing things as, for instance, white paper, Shuzenji paper, 
wrapped up writing 
 
[p.5] 
 
brushes, or writing brushes having a " tomoe" on the stem, had been accustomed to be mentioned 
in the songs that accompanied the dance, but there was a certain Dazai Gon-no-sotsu Suenaka no 
Kyo who was of so dark a complexion that the people of his time called him "kuro-sotsu " (or " 
black sotsu,") and while he was holding the office of Kurando-no-to, when he danced before the 
August Presence, they changed the words to:  
 
"Oh what a black, black head ; someone must have painted him with lacquer." Also the former 
Prime Minister of Kwanzan-no-In, Prince Tadamasa, who was left an orphan when only ten years 
old owing to the death of his father Chunagon Tadamune no Kyo, was received as son-in-law by 
the To-Chunagon Kasei-no-Kyo in the time of Go Naka no Mikado, when he held the office of 
Harima no kami, and it was an exceedingly gorgeous bridal, so that at the Go-sechie of this time 
they japed at him with the refrain; "The rice of Harima, the scouring rush and the "muku" leaves, 
they polish up people's fine raiment."  Though long ago such things had happened, nothing had 
been done, and now people said that what was to be done was doubtful. As he had expected 
after the conclusion of the festival, all the courtiers [9] and officials together appealed against him ; 
for coming to a Court entertainment wearing a sword and bringing military retainers within the 
Court Precincts were things strictly regulated according to rank : for this there was Imperial 
Order and ancient precedent, But Ason Tadamori had stationed a soldier wearing common dress, 
said to be a retainer of his family, in the small court of the Palace, and had coe to the Go-Sechie 
wearing a sword by his side, and both these counts were acts of disorder such as were seldom met 
with heretofore. Indeed it was one crime piled on another, a charge he would find it difficult to 
escape. All the Court Nobles together petitioned that his name should be erased front the list of 
Courtiers and that he herewith be deprived of rank and 
 
[p.6] 
 
 office.  His Majesty the Mikado, greatly surprised, ordered Tadamori into his Presence to make 
examination into the affair. In his reply he stated that as to the presence of his retainer in the 
Palace, he certainly knew nothing about it : but if his retainers had heard of the designs that 
people were plotting against him lately, and in order to help him against such dishonour had 
come hither secretly without informing him, then he had no power to prevent it. "But if there be 
any blame, do I not yield my body herewith as for the matter of the sword, I deposited it in the 
Tonomotsukasa, and if it be brought out from thence, it may be seen if it be a real sword or not." 
As this seemed quite plausible, they hastened to bring forth the sword and exhibit it. Its outside 
was that of a dirk in a black lacquer sheath, but within was only a wooden blade covered with 
silver. Although he had displayed the appearance of a sword to avoid dishonour, his substitution 
of a wooden blade as a precaution against an after accusation was exceeding praiseworthy. A plan 
like this is very commendable in a warrior. That his retainer should have been in attendance in 
the court of the Palace this too is an example for retainers of the "bushi." So no fault was found in 
Tadamori, but, on the contrary, his conduct was greatly admired, and he was pronounced guiltless.  
 
CHAPTER III. 
 
SUZUKI.  
 
 
Tadamori's children all had the title, of "Ei-no-suke," and when they attended at Court they were 
welcomed by everyone. On one occasion when Tadamori went up to the Capital from Bizen and 
the Retired Emperor Toba augustly deigned to to enquire of him about the scenery of Akashi, he 
answered thus:  
 
[p.7] 
 
   
"Ariake no tsukimo,  
Akashi no urakaze ni; 
Nami bakari koso, 
Yoru to mieshi ka. 
"When the morning breaks o'er the wind swept sand of Akashi, 
Only the moon on high casts its faint beams on the waves.  
 
The ex Mikado was pleased to admire this verse and ordered it to be preserved in the collection 
entitled " Kinyo-shu."[2] 
 
There was a fair lady-in-waiting in the Sendo Palace of the ex-Midado much beloved by 
Tadamori, whom he was wont to visit every evening. And it chanced that one night, after so 
doing he left in her room a fan painted with the rising moon; the other ladies seeing it were much 
amused, saying: " Oh how doubtful is the place where the moon has risen!"  to which the lady 
replied :  
Kumoi yori tada mori [1]  
Kuru tsuki nareba, 
Oboroge nite wa 
Iwaji to zo omou. 
 
If the moon indeed has drifted down from the heavens,  
Surely then the sky must be a little obscure.  
 
Thus showing that her wit was not at all shallow, This was the mother of Satsuma-no-kami 
Tadanori ; as people are drawn to each other by similar dispositions, Tadamori's taste was 
matched by her elegance. Then Tademori becoming Gyo-bu-kyo [3] afterwards died at the age of 
fifty eight on the fifteenth day of the first month of the third year of Ninpei. His eldest son 
Kiyomori followed in his footsteps. In the first year of Hogen, when the Sadaijin of Uji brought 
the realm into disorder, he put himself at the head of the Imperial party and 
 
[p.8] 
 
was rewarded for his services. At first he had the office of Aki-no-kami, then he was promoted to 
be Harima-no-kami, and in the third year of the same era he became Dazai-no-dai-ni. In the 
twelfth month of the first year of Heiji, at the time of the rebellion of Nobuyori and Yoshitomo, 
he beat down the rebels in the Imperial cause, and the rewards bestowed on him for many 
meritorious deeds by the August kindness were very great. In the next year he received the 
Senior Third Rank, and succeeded to the titles of Saisho Eifu-no-kami, and Kebi-ishi-no-Betto 
one after the other, and passing over the ranks of Chunagon and Dainagon, took rank as a 
Minister of State. He did not even become Minister of the Left or Right, but rose straight from 
Naidaijin to be Dajodaijin of the Lower First Rank. Though not a commander of armies, he went. 
armed and surrounded by retainers, and by special permission of the Retired Emperor, entered 
and departed from the Court riding in state in ox-wagon or palanquin, acting as one who holds 
alone the whole power of administration. Since it was the function of the Dajodaijin to be a 
pattern and example of virtue to the whole country, to consider which was the right course in 
ruling, and to tranquillize the universe by his government, if such an one could not be found, the 
office was to be declared vacant, for except it were held by such an one, the office would surely 
be polluted. Now that this lay-monk of a Governor should hold the Heaven and the Four Seas in 
the hollow of his hand, verily there is no need for further speech. 
 
Now the reason for this great prosperity of the Heike was said to be the favour of Kumano 
Gongen. And this was the manner of it ; when Kiyomori was yet only styled Aki-no-kami, he 
went to worship at Kumano by ship from Anonotsu in Ise, 
 
and a large "Suzuki" fish sprang up into his vessel, as it is related in former times that a white fish 
leaped into the ship of Bu, king of Shu, and however it may have been he attributed it to the 
favour of the Gongen. As we have said, he was on religious pilgrimage, so that he was observing 
the ten prohibitions, abstaining from animal food and making purifications, yet departing from 
these, he cooked the fish himself and ate of it and gave also to his children who were with him. 
And afterwards nought but good fortune attended him and he at last became Dajodaijin. His 
posterity too attained high office more quickly than a dragon ascends the clouds, greatly excelling 
in happiness the nine generations of their ancestors.  
 
CHAPTER IV. 
 
KAMURO ; OR BOY ATTENDANTS.  
 
 
Now Prince Kiyomori, being overtaken by illness on the eleventh day of the eleventh month of 
Ninan, at the age of fifty one, retired from the world and took monk's vows to save his life, 
assuming the religious name of Jokai. As the result of this, his sickness departed and he was cured, 
fulfilling the decree of destiny. Yet after his retirement from the world he did not put an end to 
his luxurious living. People obeyed him as grass before the wind, and depended on him as the 
earth does on the rain that moistens it. If one speaks of the Princes of the house of Rokuhara 
dono, they were most noble and illustrious, and none might be considered equal to them. 
Moreover as for the brother of the Nyudo's wife, Taira Dainagon Tokitada Kyo, --all those who 
did not belong to his house were to be considered people of no position, so that everyone was 
wishing to make alliance with him. From the manner of wearing the " eboshi " to the style of the 
crest on clothes, everything must be in the fashion of Rokuhara ; so that everyone from one end 
of the land to the other studied it. 
 
Now however wisely a king or ruler may govern or in the 
 
[p.10] 
 
case of the political actions of Regent or Prime Minister, (Sessho Kwampaku) it is a usual thing 
that certain worthless fellows will gather together to speak ill of him ; but against this lay-priest 
in his prosperity there was not even a casual breath of reviling. And for what reason? Even 
because, by the device of this monk-regent, about three hundred youths of from fourteen to 
sixteen years old, having purified themselves and polled their heads, wearing red robes, were 
everywhere patrolling the streets of the Capital. And if there was anyone who spoke evil against 
the Taira house, and one of these chanced to hear it, straightway summoning to him his fellows, 
they would violently enter that man's house, seize his treasures and household goods and bring 
him bound to Rokuhara. So that none were found to open their mouth about the things they saw 
or knew. At the very name of the Kamuro of Rokuhara everyone, both pedestrians and those 
who rode in carriages, made wide room and passed by on the other side. Even when entering or 
leaving the forbidden gate of the Palace, it was not necessary to declare their name, for the 
officials of the city looked with averted eyes where they were concerned. 
   
 
CHAPTER V. 
 
THE SPLENDOUR OF KIYOMORI.  
 
 
Not only did Kiyomori himself live in splendour and luxury, but all his house likewise shared his 
prosperity. His eldest son Shigemori was Naidaijin and Sadaisho, his second son Munemori was 
Chunagon and Udaisho, his third son Tomomori was Chujo of the third grade, his eldest grandson 
Koremori Shosho of the fourth grade ; sixteen of his house in all held offices of the higher grade 
(Kugyo), while thirty had right of entry to Court. The whole number of his family who drew 
revenues from the provinces as military officials were about sixty persons. All others appeared as 
of no account in the world. Since long ago in the era of Nara no Mikado the office 
 
[p. 11] 
 
of Nakae-no-Taisho was first instituted in the fifth year of Shingi, and Nakae was changed to 
Konoe in the fourth year of Daido, only on three or four occasions have brothers occupied the 
offices of the Right and Left together. In the time of Montoku Tenno, on the Left was Yoshifusa 
as Sadaijin-no-Sadaisho, on the Right, Yoshisuke as Dainagon no Udaisho; they were the sons of 
Fuyutsugu, the retired Sadaijin. In the time of Shujo-in, Saneyori Ono no-miya dono was Minister 
of the Left and Morosuke Kujo dono of the Right ; they were sons of Teijin Ko. [2] In the time of 
Go-Rei-zei-in, Norimichi O-nijo dono was Minister of the Left and Yorimune Horikawa dono of 
the Right ; they were the sons of the Kwampaku Mido. In the time of Nijo-in, Motofusa Matsu 
dono was Minister of the Left, and Kanezane Tsuki-no-wa dono of the Right; they were the sons 
of Hoseiji dono. [3] All these were the sons of Regents. Among the sons of ordinary people there 
is no precedent. As for the grandson, of a man whose presence at Court was barely suffered, 
wearing the forbidden colours [4] and costume, going clothed in silk gauze and brocade and 
holding the offices of Daijin and Taisho, his sons being at the same tune Ministers of the Left and 
Right, it is indeed an extraordinary thing for future generations to hear of. Beside this he had eight 
daughters, all of whom severally achieved fortunes to be envied. One of them was to have 
become the wife of Shigemori no Kyo, Chunagon of the Emperor Sakurarnachi, and was 
betrothed to him at the age of eight, but after the revolt of Heiji the matter was altered and she 
became the wife of the Sadaijin of Kwazan-in, to whom she bore many princes. Now this 
Shigemori Kyo was called the Chunagon of Sakuramachi for the following reason. Being a man of 
very delicate taste, he exceedingly loved the scenery of Mount Yoshino ; and planting  
 
[p. 12] 
 
there tiny cherry trees, he built a house in the midst of them and dwelt in it ; so that people who 
went there in the spring of every year to see them gave him the nickname of Sakuramachi (cherry 
town). Being very grieved that these cherry blossoms should fall within seven days after flowering, 
he prayed to Ten-sho-daijin and they remained on the tree for a period of three times seven days; 
the goddess displaying her august kindness owing to the great virtue of the Emperor, and the 
flowers also requiting his affection by living on for twenty days. 
 
To resume, another of Kiyomori's daughters became Consort of the Emperor, and bore a Prince 
at the age of twenty two. On this child attaining the rank of Crown Prince, she retired from the 
world and was known by the name of Ken-rei-coon-in. Concerning this daughter of the Lay-
priest Chancellor, since she has risen to the rank of Mother of the Emperor, there is no need of 
further description. Another daughter became the wife of the Regent Rokujo. [5] She it was who, 
during the reign of the Retired Emperor Takakura, became Imperial Foster mother, and gained 
the title of Jun-san-go by Imperial Edict. She went by the name of Shirakawa den, and was a 
personage of exceeding importance. Yet another daughter had become the wife of Fugenji donom 
[6] ; another of Reizei-no-Dainagon Ryubo-no-Kyo, and another of Shichijo Shuri-no-Taiyu 
Nobutaka-no-Kyo. One daughter also he had by a lady-in-waiting of the shrine of Itsukushima in 
Aki, and she had the honour of becoming attendant on the Retired Emperor Go-Shirakawa. 
Beside her also a Palace-attendant at Kujo-no-in named Tokiwa bore him a daughter who became 
lady-in-waiting to Kawazan-no-in dono, and was styled Ro-no-on-kata (Unofficial Empress). Now 
Nippon Akitsushima has but sixty six provinces; and of these the domains of the Heike were 
thirty ; almost half the land. Beside these the manors, rice fields and gardens that they possessed 
 
[p. 13] 
 
were without number. In the multiplicity of their gorgeous costumes they were resplendent as 
the flowers of the field ; the noble and illustrious crowded before their. gates like a throng in the 
marketplace : the gold of Yoshu, the jewels of Keishu, the damask of Gokun, the brocade of 
Shiyyokko of the seven rarities and the myriad treasures not one was lacking. For poetry and 
music, fishing and riding, perchance even the Mikado's Palaces were not more renowned.  
 
CHAPTER VI. 
 
GIO.  
 
 
Now not only did this priestly statesman hold the whole country in the hollow of his hand, but, 
neither ashamed at the censure of the world, nor regarding the derision of the people, he indulged 
in the most surprising conduct. For example, in the Capital there were two famous " Shirabyoshi 
" who were sisters, named Gio and Ginyo, both young girls and very skilled in their art. The elder, 
Gio, was beloved by Kiyomori, and her younger sister also was in high favour with everyone. So 
they were enabled to build a good house for their mother, who was granted a monthly income of 
a hundred koku of rice; and a hundred kwan in money by Kiyomori. Their family was 
consequently rich and honoured, fortunate beyond the lot of most people. Now the origin of 
Shirabyoshi in our country was in the reign of Toba-in when Shima-no-chisai and Waka-no-mae 
appeared as dancers. In the beginning the Shirabyoshi wore the " suikan " or silk court robe and " 
tateboshi " or black court headdress, with a white dirk in their belt, when they danced, and it was 
like the dancing of a man : but from the middle age the headdress and sword were disused, and 
they danced only in the white " suikan," hence they were called Shirabyoshi. 
 
[p. 14] 
 
But among the Shirabyoshi [1] of the capital, when they heard of the good fortune of Gio, there 
were some who hated her and some who were envious. Those who envied her said: " Ah ! how 
fortunate is Gio Gozen, if we do even as she does we too may become prosperous in like manner ; 
" so they added the syllable " Gi " to their names to see if they too might not obtain good luck. 
Some called themselves Giichi, Giji, Gifuku, or Gitoku. Those who hated her said " Surely it is 
not a matter of the name or character with which it is written, fortune is the result of disposition 
inherited from a previous existence ;" and so few of them took such a name. Now it came to pass 
that, three years afterwards, another skillful Shirabyoshi appeared ; and she was a maiden sixteen 
years of age, born in the province of Kaga, and her name was Hotoke. And when the people of 
the capital, both high and low, saw her, they said that although from of old times many 
Shirabyoshi had been seen there, one so dexterous as she had not been beheld ; and she too was in 
exceeding great favour with all. And in the course of time Hotoke Gozen said: " Though I have 
made sport for the whole Empire, yet this great Taira minister who now is the source of all 
fortune and prosperity has not yet deigned to summon me; after the manner of entertainers I will 
e'en go uninvited." So she forthwith proceeded to the Palace in Nishi-hachijo. On her arrival, a 
servant entered the presence of the minister and announced : " Hotoke Gozen, now 
 
[p. 15] 
 
so famous in this city is without." Then the lay-priest grew very angry and replied " How then! do 
not these players attend only when they arc called ? Why is it that she has come unbidden ? 
Whether she be called God or Buddha, (Hotoke) it is not suitable that she come here while Gio 
is present. Bid her depart at once." Hotoke Gozen was already retiring at these unkind words, 
when Gio said to the Minister " It is surely the usual custom that players should attend unbidden, 
and moreover it is because she is still young and innocent that she has thus intruded on you--so it 
will be most unkind to speak harshly and send her away--how greatly will she be shamed and 
distressed by it ; as I myself have trodden the same path, I cannot but remember these things. If 
you will not deign to allow her to dance or to sing, yield, I pray you, so far as to call her back and 
receive her in audience: if you then dismiss her, it will be a favour indeed worthy of her deep 
gratitude." To this the Priest Minister answered: " Since you wish it to be so, I will see her and 
then dismiss her: " and he sent a servant to call her. Hotoke Gozen, having been thus harshly 
treated, was even then entering her carriage to return when she was summoned and turned back 
again. The Minister met her and granted her an audience. Thus Hotoke, though it seemed 
unlikely that she would gain an audience, yet through the kindness of Gio, who thus importuned 
for her, was not only able to enter the Minister's presence, but further it happened that he, 
wishing to hear her voice, directed that she should sing a song of the kind called " Imayo: " [2] and 
thus she sang:  
" When I first enjoyed the sight of your bountiful presence,  
T'was like the evergreen pine, flourishing age after age. 
Like to the pond on whose rocks is basking the turtle thrice blessed,  
Numberless storks beside it happily preening their wings."  
 
[p. 16] 
 
And those who heard it were greatly wondering at her skill and her beauty, and pressed her to 
repeat it even to three times. The Lay-priest also was greatly diverted and said " Since you are so 
skilful at Imayo you must also be able to dance well; we wish to see one of your dances." Then 
the drums were ordered to be beaten and she danced forthwith. Now Hotoke Gozen was 
renounced for the beauty of her hair and features, and her voice was no less exquisite ; how then 
should she fail in the dance ? So when she put forth all her skill and charm in dancing, Kiyomori 
was enraptured and his heart turned wholly toward her. But when Hotoke Gozen said to him : 
"Did I not present myself uninvited, and when almost rejected was I not only brought back by 
the entreaty of Gio Gozen? I pray thee grant me leave that I may return quickly ;" the lay-monk 
by no means agreed to the proposal, and thinking that she was only embarrased because of the 
presence of Gio, proposed to send Gio away. 
 
But Hotoke Gozen answered `How can this be? If we were to remain here both together, I 
should be most embarrassed, and if your Excellency send away Gio Gozen and keep me here 
alone, how ashamed will she not feel in her heart ? Indeed it will be most painful to her. If you 
deign to think of me again in the future, I am always able to come at your call. I beg that to-day I 
may be allowed to retire." 
 
Kiyomori, seeing how the matter lay, straightway ordered Gio to leave the Palace, and to that end 
sent a messenger three times. Although Gio had expected this thing from long before, she did not 
think that it would come to pass to-day or to-morrow. But as the Nyudo continually repeated 
this unreasonable demand, there was nothing for her but to sweep her room clean and to go. 
Even those who meet under the shade of the same tree, or who greet each other by the riverside, 
since it is owing to relations in a previous existence, ever feel pain at parting with each other ; 
how much more grievous a thing it is, when two have been together in affection for the 
 
[p. 17] 
 
space of three years. So in regret and grief she shed unavailing tears. Thus as it was a thing that 
must be, Gio went forth, but ere she went she wrote on the shoji this verse, thinking to bring 
perchance to remembrance the forgotten image of one who was gone. 
   
“The fresh or fading flowers of the same moor,  
In autumn meet with the same hapless fate.”  
   
Then riding in a carriage to the place where she lived, she cast hers if down within the shoji and 
wept unceasingly. Her mother and her younger sister, seeing these things, asked many questions, 
but Gio would by no means give any answer, and only by enquiring of her maid did they come to 
know what had happened. Moreover the hundred koku and hundred kwan of monthly allowance 
ceased ; it was now the turn of the relations of Hotoke Gozen to taste the enjoyment of this 
prosperity. Soon all the people of the capital heard of these matters, and wondered if it were true 
that Gio had been dismissed from the Nishi-hachijo palace. There were some who went to see 
her, some who sent letters, and some who sent their servants, but Gio, since she had no 
inclination to amuse anyone now, did not even receive their letters, neither did she treat in any 
way with the messengers. She became more and more melancholy and only shed unavailing tears. 
Thus the year ended and the next spring came. 
 
Then the Nyudo sent a messenger to Gio asking after her affairs and her health and saying that as 
Hotoke Gozen wished for someone to beguile her tedious hours, would she not come up to the 
palace to dance, or it might be sing Imayo, and thus cheer her, but Gio returned no answer, only 
she lay down and restrained her tears. Again the Nyudo sent to know why she did not go, and 
why at least she did not answer ; if she would not go, for what reason was it ? For Jokai himself 
wished to confer with her. When her mother heard this, weeping bitterly, she thus admonished 
her ; " Why at least do you not deign to 
 
[p. 18] 
 
send an answer? and why do you not go when thus rebuked ? At which Gio said, restraining her 
tears: " If I thought I ought to go, I would answer, but since I shall by no means go, I know not 
what answer I can give. As I do not go when I am thus summoned, he has somewhat to discuss 
with me, he says ; and what may this be but perchance to drive me from the city, or it may be to 
take my life. Beyond these two things no worse is possible. Even though one go forth from 
Miyake, the way is not so sorrowful. Again if one is called away from life, would one grudge this 
body so much ? Once having known the bitterness of being disliked, shall I look on his face a 
second time ? " Now when she did not feel it necessary to reply, her mother again admonished 
her, weeping " Among those who dwell in this land, the commands of the Nyudo ought not to be 
disobeyed, and moreover the relation of man and woman is from a former existence, it does not 
begin in this life; even though the pledge be for a thousand or ten thousand years, there are many 
that soon are parted, and though some think that it will be but for a little while, yet it may 
endure unto the end of life. The thing that has no certainty in this life of ours is the relation 
between man and woman. If you do not go now when you are summoned, it is not likely that 
you will be put to death, but certainly we shall be driven from Miyako. Even if you must leave 
the capital, you are both still young, and whatever space there may be between the rock and the 
tree it is easy to pass over ; but I am old, and when weak and declining, to go and live in a strange 
place, is sad even to think of. Oh that I might be allowed to live and die in Miyako ! " Thus 
considering her filial duty both in this life and the next, though Gio had determined that she 
would not go, not disobedient to her mother she stood ready to set out, bathed in tears ; indeed 
her feelings were very pitiable. As it would be lonely for her to go alone, her younger sister, 
Ginyo prepared to accompany her, with two other Shirabyoshi beside, making in all a company 
of four. In 
 
[p. 19] 
 
one carriage they rode together and carne to the Nishi-hachijo palace. 
 
On entering however, she was not called to take the seat she had formerly occupied, a place 
much lower down being provided for her. " Alas ! " thought she, " how shall this be ? Although 
there is no fault in me, and although I have come hither, how am I distressed in being given a 
lower seat." And not knowing what to do, she said nothing to anyone, but her tears fell plentifully 
from beneath the sleeve she pressed to her face. When Hotoke Gozen saw this, she was greatly 
affected and said to Kiyomori, " It would have been better if you had not sent for her ; but now 
let her be called up hither, or if not, suffer me to be dismissed and go away." 
 
The Nyudo would not at all consider this and would not permit her to go away, but by and by he 
deigned to receive Gio and to greet her and enquire how she did, explaining that, as Hotoke 
Gozen was lonely, it would be very pleasant if Gio would comfort her by dancing and singing 
Imayo. Gio replied, with difficulty suppressing her tears, " Indeed I came wishing not to disobey 
your august command," and sang the following verse of Imayo-- : 
   
"Even Buddha himself was once an ordinary person,  
I also at last like unto Buddha shall grow.  
Everything on this earth can partake of the nature of  
Buddha.  
Only to be estranged, this is painful indeed."  
 
Twice she sang it, weeping bitterly, and as she sang all the Princes and Courtiers of the Heike and 
the high officers and samurai shed tears of admiration and sympathy. Kiyomori also 
acknowledged the justice of her complaint and frankly confessed it before them all. 
 
So when the dance was finished he intimated that, as at present he had to attend to other matters, 
in future she should come without any especial summons to dance and sing and 
 
[p. 20] 
 
amuse Hotoke. But Gio, repressing her tears, went forth without returning any answer. 
 
Thus Gio, not having intended to go, but thinking it cruel to disobey her mother, a second time 
suffered ignominious treatment. How pitiable it was indeed ! Then thinking that if she remained 
in this world, she was always liable to meet with such afflictions, she determined to put an end to 
her life. Her sister Ginyo, hearing this, also made up her mind to die with her. 
 
Then their mother, being aware of their resolve, again with tears more gravely admonished them. 
" If you have determined to do this, how greatly do I regret that I persuaded you to go ; for in 
truth your chagrin is the cause of this, and if you indeed take your own life and your sister follow 
you, you my two daughters thus dying first, what profit is it to me your mother, who am aged 
and declining, if I still live on ? I too with you will cast away my life. Now to cause one's mother, 
who has not yet attained the limit of her years to cast her life away, is it not even as one of the 
five great sins ? [3]This life is but a temporary abiding place, shame upon shame even, what is it 
to be accounted ? There is only sadness of heart in the long darkness of this world. If in this life 
we become attached to things, in the next life we must tread an evil way in sadness.” Thus 
melted in tears she persuaded them. Gio, also weeping, admitted that she spoke truth; doubtless 
it was as one of the five great sins that, because of regret at being put to shame, she should 
determine to put an end to her life. So it was that she gave up her intention of dying by her own 
hand : but since if she should stay in Miyako she would still be liable to humiliation Gio, at the 
age of only one and twenty, deserted the capital and became a nun. In a mountain village in the 
recesses of Saga, building herself a but of brushwood, she continually murmured her invocations 
to Buddha. When her 
 
[p. 21] 
 
sister Ginyo perceived that she did thus, having made compact to die with her, how much more 
when the world has become so hateful shall she not at least accompany her sister. So at the age of 
nineteen she changed her condition, and retiring from the world with her elder sister, devoted 
herself to prayers for their future happiness. Then their mother, seeing that she was left alone, 
aged, grey haired and feeble, since her two young daughters had forsaken the world, despairing of 
any future happiness, at the age of forty five shaved her head ; earnestly giving herself up to 
prayer to Buddha, with her two daughters she sought a happier birth in future. 
 
Thus the spring passed by and the summer grew late ; the first winds of autumn began to blow. 
Gazing at the Milky Way where the lover stars [4] meet in the heavens, when verses are 
accustomed to be traced on the leaves of the " kaji," watching the evening sun hide herself behind 
the ridge of the western hills, they likened the sun-set to the Pure Land of the West, [5]wondering 
when they should be reborn in that blessed region and with all desire extinguished abide there for 
ever. Thus they continued to meditate on their sad condition, their tears alone being 
inexhaustible. But one evening when twilight was passing into darkness they had shut their 
latticed door of bamboo and lighted their dimly burning lamp, and mother and daughters 
together were repeating the " Nembutsu " when there came a knocking on the lattice. The three 
nuns were at once overcome by fear : " Ah ! perchance it is some goblin who has come to disturb 
our prayers and make our Nembutsu of no avail. For what human being will approach such a 
brushwood but as this by night to which none comes even by day? Such 
 
[p. 22] 
 
a slight bamboo gate as this, even if we shut it, is easy to break through, therefore let us open it 
without de'ay. If indeed it be a pitiless one who will deprive us of life, relying on the True Vow 
of Amida on whom we now we have called, if we ceaselessly repeat the Nembutsu, surely the 
Buddha and the attendant Bosatsu hearing our voice will comp and meet us, leading us safely to 
the Paradise of the West." Thus earnestly repeating the Nembutsu, admonishing each others' 
hearts and holding each the hand of the other, they opened wide the bamboo lattice. 
 
But behold it was no evil spirit but only Hotoke Gozen that stood outside. While Gio was 
enquiring how Hotoke Gozen had come to visit them, whether in a dream or in her actual person, 
Hotoke answered amid her tears. "It is a strange thing to speak of what has happened, but if I 
speak it not, perhaps I may not be remembered. So I will relate all things as they were from the 
beginning in detail. When first I came to the Court uninvited and was about to go away 
disappointed after being dismissed, it was at your request that I was called back again; but a 
woman is a person not to be relied on, so that, not obeying my own conscience, I allowed you to 
be sent away and even stayed myself in your stead. Now in consequence of this I am 
overwhelmed with shame and conscience stricken. When I saw you go away I felt it to be 
through my fault and could not feel at all happy. Moreover when I saw the lines written by your 
hand on the shoji, "In autumn meet with the same hapless fate," I thought it was indeed true. 
And then when you were once more summoned and when you recited the Imayo verse, the 
whole matter came to my mind again. But as I did not know where you were, I enquired and 
heard that you were together in a certain place absorbed in prayer and meditation. Then indeed I 
felt envious of you, and having zealously begged my freedom since the Nyudo has no further 
need of me, when I thought attentively about the matter, the glory of this Shaba-world is a dream 
of a 
 
[p. 23] 
 
dream--pleasure and prosperity, of what value are they? Very difficult it is to receive a body and 
obtain the mercy of the Buddha. If now I go down in sorrow to the underworld I am unable to 
obtain rebirth in another life ; yea how difficult will it be to rise up again. In a world of 
uncertainty for both old and young how can we rely on our youth ? The day when the breath 
enters our body or goes forth we cannot know ; our life is more fleeting than gossamer or a flash 
of lightning ; if we boast of the glory that endures for a moment, loss of happiness in the future 
life must be our portion. So this morning stealing out unperceived, I have come hither as you see, 
putting away my ordinary dress to become a recluse ; thus having changed any condition, I 
entreat that you will condescend to pardon my former trespass, that together repeating the 
Nembutsu we may sit on one lotus in Paradise together. But if I can not attain my desire, I will 
wander away whither I know not, falling down under some tree or on some mossy bank, and ever 
zealously repeating the Nembutsu, I will strive to attain rebirth in Paradise." 
 
So pressing her sleeve to her face she entreated them. Gio answered her, scarce withholding her 
tears: "Not even in a dream did I imagine that you would think thus, while I lived according to 
the custom of this fleeting world ; when I thought of the unhappiness of my condition, often I 
felt resentment at your conduct in spite of myself, thus suffering loss in this life and the next. But 
as now you have changed your condition, your former faults have passed away like the dew of 
morning. Now do I feel extreme happiness knowing that you will without doubt attain your 
desire and be reborn in bliss. If people may say that my having become a nun was a difficult thing, 
shall I too so consider it ? It was because I hated this world and wished to put an end to my life 
that I did this. But that you, having no resentment or sorrow, and being now but seventeen years 
old, should thus despise this world and so earnestly set your mind on the Pure Land, thinking only 
of the Noble 
 
[p. 24] 
 
Path, what a happy state of virtuous enlightenment is this indeed ! 
 
So the four of them retired from the world together, morning and evening offering flowers and 
incense before Buddha's shrine, and with one mind fervently pouring out their petitions; each one 
sooner or later obtaining her desire for rebirth in bliss. And in the register of the temple Cho-ko-
do built by the Ho-o Go-Shirakawa the Honourable spirits of the four are found enshrined. 
Indeed it is a very marvellous thing.  
 
CHAPTER VII. 
 
TWICE AN EMPRESS.  
 
 
From ancient times to the present day, since the families of Gen and Hei were both called in to 
assist in the government, if there were any who, making light of the constitution of the land, did 
not obey the Imperial laws, they were corrected by the other party, and thus any disorder was 
prevented. But after Tameyoshi was killed in Hogan and Yoshitomo in Heiji, some of the Genji 
went into exile and others lost their lives, so that now only the Heike were flourishing and no 
one else dare raise his head ; and it seemed as if this state of things would last for ever. But after 
the death of the Retired Emperor Toba wars ensued, and murders, banishments, vacant offices 
and suspensions were continually occurring, so that the whole country was disquieted and society 
was not able to rest in peace, Especially from the period Ei-ryaku and O-ho when some personal 
retainers of the Retired Emperor were punished by the Imperial Court and conversely some of 
those of the Imperial Court were chastised by the Retired Emperor ; so that high and low were 
afraid, and no one felt at ease, but all were as though looking into a deep pool or walking on thin 
ice. And the relations between the Emperor and the Retired Emperor, however estranged they 
night be, were remarkable for their extraordinary circumstances. According to the way of a 
 
[p. 25] 
 
degenerate age like this, people tried to anticipate each other in cunning. Though the Emperor 
was continually contradicting the orders of the Retired Emperor, yet one thing especially there 
was that caused great astonishment to all, and many found fault with his Majesty: it was as 
follows :--The Consort of the late Retired Emperor Konoe, who was entitled to be styled Taiko-
tai-kogu or Grandmother of the Emperor, was the daughter of Prince Kinyoshi the Udaijin of Oi-
no-mikado. After the former Emperor had pre-deceased her she moved to the detached palace of 
Konoe, called Kawahara, outside the Court precincts, and about the period Ei-ryaku, having come 
to the age of about two or three and twenty, she was a little past her prime. But as she still had 
the reputation of being the first beauty in the land, the Emperor fell deeply in love with her and 
secretly ordered several of the bravest of his retainers to go to the detached palace, and privately 
sent love letters to her. She however, did not presume to assent to his August suit. So straightway 
showing his affection openly, His Majesty deigned to intimate to the Udaijin's family that he 
wished to bring her into the Palace as official Empress. Now as this was a decree unprecedented 
in the country, the courtiers took counsel together about it, and all uttered different opinions. 
There is, it must be regretfully admitted, an example in a foreign country, in that of Soku-ten 
Kogo of China, the Consort of Taiso of To, and thus step mother of the Emperor Ko-so, who 
after the death of Taiso became the Consort of Koso. This having happened in a foreign country 
is a different matter, but in our country from the time of Jimmu Tenno, in all the seventy or 
more generations of mortal Emperors we have heard of no such thing as becoming Empress for 
the second time. The courtiers having expressed their decision unanimously, the Retired Emperor 
[1] declared to the Emperor that this thing must not be but His Majesty answered: " The Emperor 
has neither father 
 
[p. 26] 
 
nor mother ; we sit on the Jewel Throne by merit of the Ten Virtues. [2] Such a thing as this 
must be, entrusted to the Imperial Will." 
 
As the date of the official entry of the new Empress was soon communicated by Imperial 
Edict, .the Retired Emperor could do nothing more. When the lady heard it she was overcome by 
tears. " If " she said " I had not out-lived my former Lord, but at the beginning of the autumn of 
the period Kyu-ju I had terminated my dew-like existence with his, or if I had become a nun and 
retired from the world, I should not have had to hear such unhappy tidings." But the Minister her 
father spoke as follows : " One who resists the Emperor's will is no more than a madman;. already 
the Imperial. Edict has been published, so there is nothing more to be said ;. only you must go 
quickly. If a Prince should be born you will be styled " Kokubo, Mother of the country, and I too 
shall become the grandfather of an Emperor ; truly an auspicious thing. If thus you will help your 
father it.will be indeed an extremely filial act." To these. words the Empress Dowager made no 
answer. 
 
Somehow or other in the course of her writing practise she had written this verse: 
   
" Better by far it had been to have died when in my 
bereavement ; _ 
Than to live on and hand down a name unexampled  
like this."  
 
How this thing will be published in the world, a pitiful and sad case will people consider it!  
 
Soon the day for the State Entry into the Palace arrived. 
 
[p. 27] 
 
The Minister her father and the Courtiers attendant on the Emperor hastened on the ceremony 
of departure from the Palace with all speed, but as she was very reluctant, evening came on and 
she had not yet started. Thus it was past midnight when she entered her carriage. After making 
her State Entry into the Palace she was conducted into the Reikei-den, and then straightway 
assisted in the morning ceremony of government administration. In the Imperial apartments of 
the  Shishin-den [3] were the shoji painted with the figures of the Chinese Sages I-in, Tei-ko-rin, 
Gu-sei-nan, Tai-ko-bo, Ro-ku-ri Sensei, Riseki and Shi-ba. There were also shoji with paintings of 
long-armed people, long-legged people, and horses. The Oni-no-ma, or Devil's Room, had shoji 
painted with a lifelike figure of the Chinese general Ri. There is reason to suppose that the shoji 
of the seven Sages were painted by Owari-no-kami Ono-no-Tofu. Moreover is it not among the 
paintings of the shoji of the Sei-ryo-den th. 
at there is to be seen one by Kanaoka of the moon at down on the distant hills? When the retired 
Emperor Konoe was a child, he had in the course of his play made some marks on the paper, and 
when his former consort looked, they were there all unchanged : and she thought fondly of his 
memory and made this verse: 
   
"Ah! to think of the sorrows that note have fallen zip, oil me 
When I look at the moon, lining again I'll the Court."  
 
And during this second intimacy with the Emperor her unspeakable sadness affected her so much 
that she fell, sick.  
 
CHAPTER VIII. 
 
THE QUARREL ABOUT THE TABLETS.  
 
 
Now about the spring of the first year of Ei-man, His Augustness the Mikado fell sick, and in the 
beginning of the 
 
[p. 28] 
 
summer of the same year his disease became exceedingly severe. Now the daughter of the 
Minister of the Treasury, lki-no-Kanemori had a son by His Majesty who was two years old, and 
it was expected that he would be made Crown Prince; [1] but on the twenty fifth of June scarcely 
had a decree been published appointing him Crown Prince than he was immediately that same 
night placed on the Throne : whereat everyone was much astonished. Those learned in such 
matters said that if investigation be made into the Imperial Line, Seiwa Tenno inherited the 
Throne of Montoku Tenno at the age of nine : at this time Chu jin Ko (Fujiwara Yoshifusa) 
assisted his young Lord in the government, just as in China Shu-kodan administered all the affairs 
of state in behalf of Sei-O, and this was the beginning of the office of Sessho (Regent). 
 
Toba-in came to the Throne at five and Konoe-in at three years of age, but even if these be 
quoted, the present Prince was only two years old : still even if without precedent, it is foolish to 
be disturbed about it. On the 27th, of July of the same year the Retired Emperor departed this life 
at the age of twenty two like the untimely falling of a flower in bud, and within the Jewel 
Curtain and the Brocade Vail all were choked with tears. That same night he was borne to Funa-
oka Yama behind Rendai-no to the North East of the Temple of Ko-ryu-ji. After the August 
Obsequies, many priests from the En-ryaku-ji temple of Hiei-san and the Ko-fuku-ji at Nara 
came to blows about the question of putting up their tablets. 
 
It was the custom after the death of an Emperor that he should be borne to the place of burial 
attended by the monks of the South and North Capitals, (Nara and Kyoto,) and as they went in 
procession round the tomb, they put up the tablets of their repective temples. When there was 
no temple endowed 
 
[p. 29] 
 
by Shomu Tenno to dispute it, the tablet of To-dai-ji was put up, and next came that of Ko-
fuku-ji founded by [2] Tan-kai-Ko. Of the Northern Capital, opposite to that of Kofuku-ji the 
tablet of En-ryaku-ji was to be put up, after that the tablet of En-jo-ji, the foundation of Tem-mu 
Tenno begun by Chisho Daishi. But on this occasion the priests of En-ryaku-ji, respecting what 
precedent I know not, fixed up the tablet of their temple after that of To-dai-ji and before that of 
Ko-fuku-ji, and while the priests of the South Capital were taking counsel with one another what 
they should do, there stood forth two very worthless priests of the Sai-kon-do of Ko-fuku-ji, 
called Kwannon-bo and Sei-shi-bo; Kwannon-bo was attired in a hara-maki, or body armour, 
corded with black silk, and held a white hilted naga-maki or short halberd, grasped in both hands ; 
Sei-shi-bo was in armour laced with green thread and carried a huge tachi in a black lacquered 
scabbard. Both of these ran up, and cutting down the tablet of En-ryaku-ji, broke it in pieces and 
threw them hither and thither. ,  
 
Then, shouting out the words of a song, which run thus: 
   
" How gaily flows the water  
Hark to the sound of the waterfall,  
Even the sun in shining , 
By no means departs its rule."  
 
they disappeared again among the monks of the South Capital.  
 
CHAPTER IX. 
 
TILE CONFLAGRATION AT KIYOMIZU.  
 
 
Now the faction of En-ryaku-ji, in the matter of resisting the violence that had been done, very 
carefully watched for an occasion, but said no word. After the decease of the Mikado everything, 
even the trees and flowers, was grief stricken and of sorrowful appearance, and after this 
undignified wrangle, all, high and low, dispersed to the four quarters crestfallen and 
 
[p. 30] 
 
abashed.. . On the same 29th, clay, at the hour of the Horse, hearing that a great company of the 
priests of En-ryaku-ji was going clown to Kyoto, Bushi and Kebi-ishi went out to Nishi Sakamoto 
to prevent them, but in spite of this they burst through, and a great tumult arose. Then the 
Retired Emperor Go-Shirakawa, how it happened is not certain, sent orders to the En-ryaku-ji 
faction, and, thinking that the Heike were to be attacked, sent soldiers to the Palace to strengthen 
all the guard houses for protection. The Heike all gathered together at Rokuhara, and the Retired 
Emperor also betook himself thither in haste. Kiyomori was at that time only Dainagon no 
Udaisho, and was in a very great state of agitation. Komatsu dono, wondering what all the mater 
was about, tried to pacify them, but there was much tumult and reviling among the soldiers. The 
monks of Hiei-san did not go to Rokuhara, but casually proceeded to press on to Kiyomizu, 
where they burned all the temple buildings and monastery. This was to revenge the insult they 
had received on the night of the Imperial Funeral ; since Kiyomizu was a branch temple of Ko-
fuku-ji. The day after their burning Kiyomizu, they wrote the text: " By Kwannon's aid [1] the 
cave of fire will become a lake," and affixed it to the great gate, but the next day another tablet 
was substituted bearing the text " Her wondrous power is without equal for all ages." When the 
crowd returned, the Retired Emperor came back hurriedly from Rokuhara, and Shigemori Kyo 
alone went to meet him. 
 
The Chancellor his father did not go ; this was out of precaution. When Shigemori returned his 
father the Dainagon spoke thus to him : " I am rather afraid of this visit of the Retired Emperor; 
he has been thinking of doing something or other, and sometimes he has even expressed it, and 
for that reason be has come, so I cannot altogether rid my mind of suspicion." You 
 
[p. 31] 
 
must not show any such suspicion either in word or deed," replied Shigemori, " it is not a good 
thing to reveal one's thoughts to people. . You must submit entirely to the will of the Ho-o: . If 
you show sympathy you may secure the protection of both 'Kami' and  'Hotoke.' If you do thus 
there will be no need to fear about your person." " Indeed Shigemori is most generous," said his 
father. 
 
When the Ho-o returned, those retainers who were most intimate with him remarked: " What a 
strange thing is .this that is said ! The Ho-o has not the least idea of such a thing.." Now a man of 
influence in the Ho-o's Palace named Saiko Hoshi was there at this time, and he came forward 
and said: " Heaven alone cannot say anything, man must say it. The Heike have now exceeding 
great power and I think it is Heaven's will that someone should protest." But the others said one 
to another:  "This is not a good thing to say. Walls have ears. Take care ! " whispering in 
trepidation. Now as this year was a year of mourning, the ceremonies of 'Gokei' (purification of 
the new Emperor), and 'Daishoei' (presentation of new rice to the Imperial Ancestors) were not 
performed. 
 
Now Ken-shun-mon-in, while yet she was called Higashino-Onkata, had conceived a son by the 
Ho-o, and this Prince was now five years old and there was a rumour that he was to be 
nominated Crown Prince. So it was that on the twenty-fourth day of the twelfth month he was 
suddenly given the title of Shinno. On the advent of the New Year the era was changed to Nin-an. 
On the eighth clay of the tenth month of the same year the Prince who had been raised to be 
Shinno the year before was proclaimed Crown Prince at Higashi Sanjo Palace. Thus the Crown 
Prince was an uncle of six years old, and the Emperor was his nephew three years old, their 
relation and age being quite abnormal and improper. Yet in the second year of Kwan-wa-Ichijo 
had become Emperor at the age of seven and Sanjo Crown Prince at eleven ; it was, therefore not 
without precedent. The Emperor (Rokujo) had come to the 
 
[p. 32] 
 
throne at two years old and was dethroned when barely five, becoming a priest on the 19th day of 
the second month and taking the title of Shin-in before he had attained the age of Genpuku. Both 
in China and in our own country this is the first time that such a thing has happened. On the 
twentieth day of the third month of the third year of Nin-an, the new Emperor was enthroned in 
the Daikyoku den. When this Emperor came to the throne the fortunes of the Heike family stood 
at their zenith, for his mother Kenshun-mon-in was the younger sister of Hachijono-Ni-i-Dono 
the wife of the Lay-priest Chancellor, while Taira Dainagon Tokitada was her elder brother and 
so the Imperial Uncle, so that he assume] the position of Regent in matters both within and 
without the Court, all appointments of officials both in spring and autumn being in his hands 
alone. His position was just like that of Yokoku-chu, while his younger sister Yokihi was the 
favourite of the [2] Emperor of China. How very enviable was his prosperity and popularity. As 
the Nyudo consulted him about all political matters both great and small, the people of the time 
called him Hei-Kwampaku. (i.e. K responsible to Kiyomori, not, as usual, to the Emperor.)  
 
CHAPTER X.  
A COLLISION OF GRANDEES.  
 
 
    On the sixteenth day of the seventh month of the first year of Ka-o the Retired Emperor Go-
Shirakawa became a priest, but as, even after this, he continued to direct the administration as 
before, there was no difference between the Retired Emperor and the Reigning one : so that the 
Courtiers of the Retired Emperor and the Military Guards (Hokumen) of both upper and lower 
ranks received rank and emolument in abundance 
 
[p. 33] 
 
Still, as is the way of man's heart, they were not contented, but would say to their intimate 
friends when they met; 
 
" Ah, if that man loses his position then that demesne will be vacant;" or "if that fellow could be 
done away with, then I should get his office." The Ho-o himself murmured in secret; "From of 
old there have been many who have subdued the enemies of the country, but never before have 
they been so rewarded. When Sadamori defeated Masakado and when Yoriyoshi put down 
Sadato and Muneto, when Yoshihide conquered Takehira Yoshihide and Iehira a reward was 
given them, but it was nothing more than a demesne ; so that this arbitrary conduct in rewarding 
them is not according to reason. This is because the times are degenerate, and the principle of 
monarchic government is no longer observed." He could find no opportunity to utter any open 
reproof however. The Heike, on the other hand,, bore no special ill-will to the Imperial House. 
 
The primary cause of all the disturbance that was to follow was that on the sixteenth day of the 
tenth month of the second year of Ka-o,  Shinsammi no Chujo Sukemori, second son of Komatsu 
dono, a young man of thirteen years old who was then Echizen-no-kami, wishing to see the 
beauties of the snow scenery at Karino, the snow having fallen in patches here and there, went 
out with a train of thirty youthful retainers on horseback to Rendaino, Murasakino and Ukon-no-
baba, and Hew many hawks at the quails and skylarks from morning till evening, returning to 
Rokuhara about twilight. Now just at this time the Sessho Motofusa was proceeding from the 
Palace of the Ho-o at Higashi-no-do to the Imperial Palace, and going to enter at the Yuho gate, 
he went southward from Higashi-no-do, and turned to the East at Oi-no-Mikado, so that 
Sukemori met I him face to face between Oi-no-Mikado and I-no-kuma. Immediately the 
Minister's retainers shouted peremptorily," Who goes there? Dismount! Dismount ! It is His 
Excellency who passes! But Sukemori, being too proud and careless of his behaviour, his retainers 
too being all youths of under twenty 
 
[p.34] 
 
who understood little of courtesy, spite of it being a Minister who passed, did not dismount 
according to custom, as etiquette demanded : on the contrary they threatened to break through 
his train. As it was dark perchance the Minister's retainers were not aware that it was Kiyomori's 
grandson, or if they were they made as if they were not, but anyhow they pulled Sukemori and all 
his retainers from off their horses and put them to exceeding shame. Sukemori could do nothing 
but make his way back to Rokullara and relate all these circumstances to his grandfather the Lay-
priest Chancellor. The Nyudo was extremely wrath; " Even a Minister," he said, " must respect 
my family, and it is a most hateful thing that he should insult such a young man; for a thing like 
this our house maybe despised. Thus I cannot help letting the Minister know these things and 
indeed I hope to make him rue it." But Shigemori said ; " We are not affected by such a thing ; if 
we be mocked by men like Yorimasa or Matsumoto of the Genji, then we should indeed be put 
to shame, but it was exceedingly discourteous of my son. not to alight when he met the 
Minister." Then he called the samurai who had been in attendance during the incident and said ; " 
From henceforth take great care lest you should by mistake insult a Minister." But afterwards the 
Nyudo, without saying anything to Komatsu dono, collected about sixty men, led by Namba and 
Seno, all rustic samurai of exceeding bad manners who heeded nothing except the commands of 
the Nyudo, and bade them go and wait for the Minister when he went out on the twenty first 
day, and cut off the front hair of his outriders and retainers as a revenge for the insult to Sukemori. 
The samurai respectfully assented, and went forth. The Minister, never dreaming of such a thing, 
went out with more state than usual, owing to his having to stay in the apartments of the Sessho 
to fix the time for the Emperor's coming of age ceremonies, (Gempuku, Assuming the [2] 
Kammuri, 
 
[p. 35] 
 
and Reception of Officials) to be held next year. On this occasion he had to enter by the 
Taikenmon, and as he was going to the west of Naka-no-mikado, at Inokuma near Horikawa, he 
met about three hundred retainers of Rokuhara all armed to the teeth, who surrounded him on 
all sides with shouts of exultation : then, chasing his retainers and outriders this way and that, 
they treated them with contumely and cut off their front hair. Among his sixteen retainers, 
Takemoto, a retainer of the Udaijin also had his haircut off. When they cutoff the top knot of To 
Kurando-no-Taiyu Takanori they said; " You must not consider this as your own top knot but as 
though it were your master's." 
 
Then poking the ends of their bows into the car, they broke the curtains, cut the harness and 
trappings off the oxen and drove them hither and thither, finally returning to Rokuhara with 
shouts of glee, whereupon the Nyudo praised them for carrying out his orders so well. But the 
two retainers who rode next to the Minister's car, Inaba -no-Saizukai and Toba-no-Kunihisa-Maro, 
though of quite low rank were very shrewd fellows, and putting the car in order again they 
brought their master to the palace of Naka-no-Mikado. He, wiping away his tears with the 
sleeves of his dress of ceremony, returned home again in a truly pitiful state. It is not necessary to 
speak of Kamatari and Fuhito of the Fujiwara house, but since the time of Yoshifusa and 
Mototsune to this day no such insult as this outrage of the Heike has ever been known to befall a 
Sessho Kwampaku. 
 
When Komatsu dono heard of it he was greatly disturbed in his mind, and all the samurai who 
had taken part in it were dismissed from their posts. " However strange a thing the Nyudo 
ordered you to do, why did you tell me nothing of it," he said, " this is Sukemori's fault : the 
[3]Sendan is fragrant even from the time when it has but two leaves; so even a boy of twelve or 
thirteen years knows what courtesy is and ought to 
 
[p. 36] 
 
practise it. He is guilty of unfilial conduct in bringing the name of the Nyudo into disrepute by 
such ill manners and must bear he responsibility." So Shigemori removed him to Ise-no-kuni a 
discipline. He was indeed a leader to be admired both by lord and vassal.  
 
CHAPTER XI.  
SHISHI NO TANI.  
 
 
Owing to this incident the Emperor's Gempuku was postponed to the twenty fifth day of the 
same month, and was fixed take place at the Palace of the Retired Emperor, and as the Sessho's 
presence would be then required, he received an Imperial communication appointing him Dajo-
daijin on the fourteenth day. Soon after, on the seventeenth day, he paid a visit of thanks to the 
Retired Emperor, but still the condition of things generally seemed unsettled. 
 
Thus this year ended and the third year of Ka-o began. In the fifth day of the first month the 
Gempuku of the Emperor took place, and on the thirteenth day he visited the Retired Emperor 
in state. The Ho-o and his Consort received him. His Majesty looked splendid indeed wearing the 
Kammuri for the first time. As Imperial Gonsort he received one of the daughters of the Lay 
priest Chancellor, and at the age of fifteen he was adopted as step son by the Ho-o. 
 
Now Myo on in den, (Fujiwara Moronaga) was still at this time Naidaijin-no-Sadaisho, and on his 
resigning this office, one Tokudaiji-no-Dainagon Jittei-no-Kyo aspired to it in his stead ; Kwazan-
in-no-Chunagon Kanemasa-no-Kyo also wished for it; and [1]Shin-Dainagon Narichika-no-Kyo, 
the third son of the late Naka-no-Mikado To-Chunagon Kasei-no-Kyo also greatly desired it. This 
Dainagon, being high in favour with the Retired Emperor, began to offer many prayers for it. He 
stationed a 
 
[p. 37] 
 
hundred priests before the shrine of Hachiman to read the [2]Dai-Hannya Kyo from beginning to 
end for seven days, and while this was taking place, three doves flew forth from Oto-koyama to 
the Tachibana tree which was before Koura Daimyojin and fought one another to the death. 
Now doves are the well known messengers of [3]Hachiman Dai-Bosatsu, and in a shrine or temple 
such a thing was an extraordinary portent. The [4]Kengyo of that time, Kyosei-hoin by name, 
reported it to the Imperial Court. This was no ordinary matter, so the omens must be consulted, 
and a soothsayer among the Shinto priests, on being referred to spake thus ; " This is a portent of 
great weight, but it is not one that concerns the Emperor, but one of his subjects."  Then the 
Dainagon, not at all perturbed thereat, since in the daytime people would see him, went out 
every night from his Palace at Naka-no-Mikado Karasu-Maru to the shrine of Kamo on foot seven 
nights in succession. On the last night of the seven, on his arriving home again tired out, he fell 
asleep for a short time and dreamed that he went to the shrine of Kamo and opened the door of 
the Holy of Holies, whereupon a very majestic voice sounded forth with these words; " O cherry 
flowers, do not hate the river breeze of Kanzo, for it will not stop the flowers falling." Then the 
Dainagon, not at all afraid, set up an altar in a hollow cedar tree behind the sanctuary of the 
Yashiro of Kamo and put there a saintly priest and had prayers offered according to the [5] Dakini 
rite for a hundred days. 'Then it happened that suddenly the sky clouded over and it thundered 
exceedingly, a thunderbolt striking the great cedar tree and setting fire to it so that the shrine 
seemed in danger. 
 
[p. 38] 
 
All the priests ran together to put it out, moreover they wished to drive out the holy priest who 
was praying there, but he said ; " I intend to stay praying in this shrine for a hundred days, and is 
now the seventy fifth day, so I cannot depart now," and he :d not move. This was reported by the 
Shrine to the Imperial Palace, but the Emperor bade them do nothing that was not in accordance 
with the law. Then the priests took white rods in their hands and struck the holy priest on the 
neck so that at last they drove him out from the street Ichijo to the southward. The gods do not 
accept discourtesy, and this Dainagon had fished to become Taisho, a thing quite unsuitable to his 
rank, hence this strange happening. Now at this time the appointment of officials was not in 
accordance with the will of the Ho-o, nor, with that of the Sessho-Kwampaku, but lay solely in 
the power the Heike. Even Tokudaiji Kwazan-in did not get this nice, but Komatsu Dono 
Shigemori, the eldest son of the Nyudo, who was then Dainagon-no-Udaisho, changed over to 
"Sadaisho, while the second son Munemori, who was Chunagon, passing over the heads of others 
his superiors, became Udaisho his stead. It is quite needless to say that Tokudaiji Dono, who was 
a Dainagon of high lineage and of distinguished literary attainments and moreover head of his 
family, felt great chagrin at being thus passed over in favour of Munemori, who :, as only second 
son of the Heike family. 
 
Although it was at first rumoured that he would become a priest, Tokudaiji Dono, wishing to see 
how affairs would turn it, merely resigned his office of Dainagon and went into retirement. Now 
the Shin Dainagon Narichika-no-Kyo would naturally come after Tokudaiji Kwazan-in, but how 
great was his wrath at the elevation of such a person as Munemori, second on of the Heike family. 
So he went to the length of saying that would attain his long sought goal through the destruction 
of the Heike. His father had only been Chunagon when he was his age, but his youngest son had 
become Dainagon of the upper second rank, and had received a great province as his fief, while  
 
[p. 39] 
 
his sons and retainers also basked in the Imperial favour. What then was lacking to him that he 
should plan such a thing ? It seems like the action of a demon. In the period of Heiji, when he 
was Echigo-no-Chujo, he had taken the part of Nobuyori and ought properly to have lost his 
head then, but his neck was saved by the intercession of Komatsu Dono. Now however, 
forgetting all gratitude for this, even when no one was his enemy, he was spending all his time in 
preparing weapons and collecting soldiers and practising military activities to the exclusion of all 
else. Now Shishi-no-tani on Higashi-yama, having Miidera behind it was a very fine strategic 
position, and there was the mountain seat of Shunkwan Sozu, so he was always repairing thither 
to plot the overthrow of the Heike. One evening the Ho-o went also and with him went Joken-
Hoin the son of the late Shonagon Nyudo Shinsai. During the evening banquet they talked about 
this matter, and Hoin said; " What a foolish thing ; many people may overhear it and it will soon 
leak out and a crisis will ensue in the country." Then the Dainagon, changing his countenance, 
stood up suddenly, and knocked over with the sleeve of his ' Kariginu ' a jar (heiji) that stood 
before the Ho-o. His Majesty asked what he meant by it. The Dainagon returning to his seat 
replied; " The overthrow of the Heishi." The Ho-o thereupon smiled with satisfaction and said, " 
Let someone advance and dance the Sarugaku." Hei Hangwan Yasuyori came forth and said; " 
There are too many jars (heiji) here and so we are all intoxicated." Shunkwan Sozu replied, " 
Then what shall we do with them ? " " It is best to take off their necks," interjected Saiko Hoshi, 
as he took of the necks of the jars.[6]  Hoin, considering this all great folly, said little. However we 
consider it, it was a terrible thing. Now who are those who were in favour of it? Omi-no-Chujo 
Reiyo, commonly called Narimasa, Hosshoji-no-Shugyo Shunkwan Sozu , Yamashiro-no-kami 
Motokane, Shikibu-no-taiho Masatsuna, Hei 
 
[p. 40] 
 
Hangwan Yasuyori, So Hangwan Nobufusa, Shin Hei Hangwan Sukeyuki. Among the retainers 
Tada-no-Kurando Yukitsuna was the foremost : among the Court Guards (Hokumen) also many 
were affected.  
 
 
CHAPTER XII.  
THE FIGHT AT THE UGAWA.  
 
    Now this Hosshoji-no-Shugyo[1] Shunkwan Sozu was the grandson of Kyogoku-no-Gen-
Dainagon Gashun-no-Kyo and the son of Kidera Hoin Kwanga. The house of his grandfather the 
Dainagon was not a military one, but he, being a man of violent nature, did not easily let anyone 
pass before his house near the Sanjobo Gate in Kyogoku, but usually would stand at the middle 
gate grinding his teeth in a menacing manner. Being therefore the grandson of such a formidable 
person, this Shunkwan also, though a priest, had a pugnacious and proud nature so that he was 
just the person to take part in such an unreasonable rebellion. Shin-Dainagon Narichika-no-Kyo, 
calling Tada-no-Kurando Yukitsuna, appointed him leader of one of the forces saying; " If you 
accomplish this affair successfully, you shall have as much as you wish of fief and domain." And 
he gave him fifty 'tan' of white silk for bow bags as a gratuity. 
 
On the fifth day of the third month of the third year of An-gen Myo-in-den became Dajodaijin, 
and Komatsu Dono, passing over Gen-Dainagon Sadafusa-no-Kyo, became Naidaijin, , so that 
soon after there was a great banquet to congratulate him on becoming both Daijin and Taisho. 
The guest of honour was Oi-no-Mikado Udaijin Tsunemune Ko. The Sadaijin ought to have 
taken the upper seat, but as his father was Uji-no-Akusafu (Fujiwara Yorinaga), there was some 
fear about such a precedent. 
 
There were no [2]Hoku-men (Imperial Guards) in ancient rimes, but they were first established 
from the time of Shirakawa- 
 
[p. 41] 
 
in, and many of the Eifu obtained these posts. Tameyoshi and Morishige, who were in their youth 
pages called Inumaru and Senshumaru, and many other unimportant people also became Hoku-
men. During the time of Toba-in, Sueyori and Suenori, father and son, were both serving in the 
Court, and though sometimes acting as Courier from the Ho-o to the Imperial Court, always 
behaved in a manner suitable to their rank, but the Hoku-men of this time had too much power 
and did not respect Kugyo and Denjobito at all. Passing from lower Hoku-men to upper, from 
that many were allowed to enter the Court, and as they could achieve this they became puffed 
up and even went so far as to join in this foolish rebellion. Among these were Moromitsu and 
Narikage, who served the late Shonagon Nyudo Shinsai. Moromitsu was in the government office 
in Awa and Narikage was a man of the capital: he was born in a very low station, being a ' 
Kondei-warawa,' or foot-soldier or perhaps a kind of table page. As he was sagacious he came to 
be employed by the Ho-o. Moromitsu became Saemon-no-jo and Narikage Uemon-no-jo, then 
both of them became Yukie-no-jo. Once when. something happened to Shinsai they both 
became priests, taking the titles of Saemon-no-Nyodo Saiko and Uemon-no-jo Saikei ; but still 
after this they continued to hold the office of Master of the storehouses to the Ho-o. This Saiko 
had a son Morotaka, who also became powerful and rose to be Keb i-ish Go-i-no-jo. Furthermore 
on the nineteenth day of the twelfth month of the first year of An-gen, at the appointment of 
officials at Tsuina, (year end ceremony) he became Kaga-no-kami. 
 
While he was on duty in his province of Kaga he behaved in a lawless and barbarous manner, 
seizing the domains of shrines and temples and influential families, and doing always what was 
disorderly in everything. Now even if there is no virtuous governor, peaceful government may 
still continue, but among his arbitrary actions, during the summer of the second year of the same 
era, this Governor Morotaka brought his younger brother Kondo Hangwan Morotsune to act as 
Mokudai (Deputy). 
 
[p. 42] 
 
Now there was a certain mountain temple called Ugawa near the official residence of the 
Governor, and just as the Mokudai arrived from the capital, the priests happened to be bathing, 
whereupon he broke in among them, drove them off and bathed in their stead, driving away 
those of lower rank who were bathing near them so that his horse might be washed in their place. 
Thereupon the priests became very angry and cried out; " From of old this temple has been a 
sacred place where officials cannot enter, so let us defend our privilege and stop this invasion." 
Then the Mokudai replied angrily, " The former Mokudai were all fools, so the present one has 
no reason to follow their example : Obey the law ! " But while he was speaking the priests began 
to drive out his men, and they on their part tried to force their way in, so that one of the legs of 
the favourite horse of the Mokudai Morotsune got broken in the struggle. Then with their 
weapons they shot and hacked at each other for several hours. 
 
At length when night began to fall, the Mokudai, seeing that he could not overcome them, 
discreetly drew off his men. Afterwards the officials of the province, gathering together about a 
thousand men, came out to Ugawa and burnt down all the buildings of the monastery. Now 
Ugawa was a branch temple of Hakuzan and thither the chief priests went to appeal for help, 
namely Chishaku, Gakumyo, Hodaibo, Shochi, Gakuon, and Tosa-no-jari. Hakuzan consisted of 
three shrines and eight temples, and all of these came out together, a great multitude about two 
thousand men. On the ninth day of the seventh month of the same year in the evening they made 
for the official residence of the Mokudai Morotsune. " Today is already past; tomorrow we will 
fight," they said and only went thus far that day. The dew-laden wind of autumn blew out the 
tough sleeves of their bow bands; the lightning flashing in the sky gleamed on the stars of their 
helmets. The Mokudai, fearing that he could not hold his own, fled by night to Kyoto. At the 
hour of the Hare (6. a.m.), the enemy rushed to the assault, 
 
[p. 43] 
 
fiercely shouting their war cry. From within the castle there is no sound. When they send men to 
explore, they report that all have vanished. Then the multitude, seeing that attack is needless, 
draw off their forces, and, carrying with them the sacred emblem of the middle shrine of 
Hakuzan, go off to appeal to Hieizan. At the hour of the Horse (12. noon.), they brought it to 
Higashi Sakamoto on Hieizan : from the northern provinces the thunder rolled ceaselessly toward 
the capital ; snow fell and covered the land on the mountain and in the city: all was white even to 
the twigs of the evergreens on the mountains when they brought the sacred emblem to the shrine 
of Marodo. This shrine was the Myori Gongen of Hakuzan, the relation of the two gods being 
that of father and child. Though it was uncertain whether there would be any response from the 
deity, it was a great pleasure to the two gods to meet thus ; greater even than that of [3]Urashima, 
when he met his descendant of the seventh generation, or than that of the [4]son of Buddha at 
meeting his yet unknown father at Ryosen. So this multitude of three thousand priests from 
seven shrines each following close on the heel of the other, sleeve by sleeve continually chanted 
the holy Sutras ; it was indeed a sight that defied description. Then the priests of Hieizan 
appealed to the Emperor for the banishment of the Kokushi Kaga-no-kami Morotaka and the 
imprisonment of the Mokudai Kondo Hangwan Morotsune, but no answer was made to the 
appeal. Seeing this some of the influential nobles of the Court complained to one another: " Alas! 
Why does not the Emperor decide the affair quickly? From old times appeals from Hieizan have 
been different from all others. Okura-no-Kyo Tamefusa and Dazai Gon-no-Sotsu Suenaka-no-
Kyo were very important Court 
 
[p. 44] 
 
Officials but they were banished by appeal of Hieizan, how much more Morotaka who is a man 
of little account; the thing ought to be done properly." But, as the Chinese saying goes: " The high 
officials fear for their emoluments and do not advise the Throne, while the lower ones fear to 
make a mistake and so keep silent." So in this case everyone kept his mouth shut in council. 
 
" The waters of Kamogawa, the dice of Sugoroku [5] and the monks of Hieizan are things quite 
beyond my control," quoth the Ho-o Go-Shirakawa. In the time of Toba-in too the gift of the 
monastery of Heizenji in Echizen to Hieizan showed no small confidence in that temple; for 
when Hieizan had pressed the Emperor to give it to them he had answered that it was doing evil 
that good might come, whereupon they appealed to the Ho-o, and Go-no-Sotsu [6] Kyobo-no-
Kyo enquired, " If the monks of Hieizan bring down the sacred emblem [7] of Hiyoshi and make 
an appeal, what had better be done ? " to which the Ho o replied: "How difficult it is to resist the 
appeals of Hieizan," and complied.  
 
CHAPTER XIII. 
 
THE VOW.  
 
 
Formerly, on the second day of the third month of the second year of Ka-ho, Mino-no-kami 
Minamoto Yoshitsune Ason had slain En-o, a veteran priest of Hiei, for depriving him of his 
newly obtained fief, whereupon the chief priest of Hiyoshi and the heads of Enryakuji, about 
thirty in all, came down with a crowd of retainers and presented a petition demanding satisfaction. 
On account of this, the Kwampaku of Go-Nijo (Fujiwara Moromichi) ordered Yamato Genii 
Nakatsukasa Gon-no-Sho Yoriharu to take measures of defence, with the result that his retainers 
 
[p. 45] 
 
shot arrows at the monks, killing eight of them on the spot and wounding more than ten, so that 
the chief priest and the rest fled in all directions. Then the superior priests of Hieizan flocked 
down in great numbers to report the matter to the Emperor, but were met at Nishi-Sakamoto by 
samurai and Kebiishi and driven back again: therefore, while the Emperor was hesitating about 
his decision, they brought the sacred emblem of Hiyoshi to the Komponchudo and chanted 
through the six hundred volumes of the Dai-Hannya Sutra before it to lay a curse on the 
Kwampaku of Go-Nijo. And the manner of the petition was this; Chu-in Ho-in, who presided, 
(at that time he was only Chu-in Gubu) [1], taking the upper seat, rung the bell and with 
reverence addressed the god thus, praying with a loud voice; " O thou Gongen [5]of Hachioji, who 
hast nurtured us and cared for us from our youth up, do thou, we beseech thee, shoot a whizzing 
arrow at the Kwampaku of Go-Nijo." Thereupon ensued a strange portent ; someone dreamed 
that the whirring sound of a Kaburaya [2]was heard to proceed from the shrine of Hachioji and go 
over toward Kyoto, and the next day, when they opened the lattices of the mansion of the 
Kwampaku they saw a branch of 'Shikimi' [3]wet with dew as if it had just come from the 
mountain, and that night the Kwampaku was stricken with a sore disease because of the anger of 
the deity and took to his bed. His mother O-Dono-no-Kita-no-Mandokoro [4]in great grief went 
to the shrine of Hiyoshi, clothed scantily like a very low menial, and prayed for seven days and 
nights, offering for the success of her petition these gifts to be dedicated to the god; a hundred 
performances of the dance 
 
[p. 46] 
 
called Shiba Dengaku, a hundred horse races, a hundred courses of equestrian archery, a hundred 
bouts of wrestling, a hundred priests to chant the Nio Sutra, the same number to chant the Sutra 
of Yakushi, [6] a hundred statues of Yakushi half a hand high, one life size figure of the same 
deity together with similar statues of Shaka and Amida. Beside this she had in her heart three 
other vows and, though there was no reason for anyone to know what was in the depth of her 
mind, yet wonderful to relate, at the close of the seventh night at the shrine, it happened that a 
boy-priest, who had come with many others from the remote province of Mutsu, died suddenly 
at midnight. When they carried him out from the shrine and offered prayers, to the amazement 
of the onlookers he stood up and danced, and after dancing for the space of about half an hour, 
the god entered into him and uttered this awe inspiring oracle: "Give ear O ye people : for seven 
days of this month the mother of the Kwampaku has prayed in retirement before me : in her 
heart are three vows. She asks that the life of her son may be spared : if this be granted, first she 
will serve the shrine among the lowest mendicants for a thousand days. I am moved with 
compassion that the mother of the Kwampaku, who is so great that she regards all the world as of 
no account, is so affected by her care for her son that, forgetting the squalor of these people, she 
deigns to serve the shrine among the lowest menials for a thousand days. Secondly she will build a 
corridor from the Hashidono of the main shrine to the shrine of Hachioji. How blessed a thing it 
is that such a corridor should be built, for I feel pity for the three thousand priests who must go 
across to the shrine whether it rain or shrine. In the third place she will endow a Hokke 
Mondoko [7] to be held in perpetuity every day. All these vows are by no means foolish, for 
though the first two might perhaps be foregone, the Hokke Mondoko is most desirable. Now the 
 
[p. 47] 
 
appeal that the priests made to the Emperor was very proper, but no answer was given, only they 
were shot at and killed; wherefore they came and called on me with tears so that I was moved to 
compassion and felt that it was a thing I could never forget; moreover the arrows that were shot 
at them injured my body in its Buddha manifestation. See here whether I speak truth or falsehood; 
" and the medium, doffing his clothing, displayed under his left armpit a hollow like the mouth of 
a cup. Then he continued : " indeed this is so grievous to me that however much she vows I 
cannot prolong his life to the natural span, but if the Hokke Mondoko be endowed I will allow 
him to live for three years longer. If this be thought too little, I can do no more." With this the 
god ceased and withdrew himself. 
 
Now the mother of the Kwampaku had not said anything to anyone about her vow so that it 
never entered her mind that it could be known, and she was deeply impressed that the secret 
thoughts of her heart should thus become the subject of an oracle ; and especially was she 
thankful that the life of her son should be prolonged for a day or even for half an hour, how 
much more that three years should be granted him. Thus, restraining her tears, she departed 
homeward. Afterwards she presented her son's domain of Tanaka-no-Sho in the province of Ki-i 
to the shrine of Hachioji for ever, and so it is that we hear that to the present day the Hokke 
Mondoko is held every day without ceasing at the shrine of Hachioji. 
 
Thus the sickness of the Kwampaku of Go-Nijo was healed and he was restored whole as before 
to the great joy of his family, but alas, the three years flew by like a dream, and in the twenty-first 
day of the sixth month of the second year of Ei-cho a boil broke out at the edge of his hair, so 
that he took to his bed, and on the twenty seventh day of the same month he passed away at the 
age of thirty-eight. Though he was brave, strong-minded and valiant in his actions, when his 
illness became critical he could not bear to die. Indeed it was a sad case, and sadder too that he 
should die before his father before reaching 
 
[p. 48] 
 
the age of forty. There is no reason why a father should die before his children, but even Buddha 
the perfection of virtue, or the most enlightened Bosatsu have no power to change the decrees of 
life and death. A god who is really just and merciful cannot fail to punish for the good of mankind.  
 
CHAPTER XIV. 
 
CARRYING DOWN THE SACRED CARS.  
 
 
Thus, though the priests of Hieizan had many times petitioned the Emperor for the banishment 
of the Kokushi Kaga-no-kami Morotaka and the imprisonment of the Mokudai Kondo Hangwan 
Morotsune, yet no answer was given them, so, without celebrating the festival of Hiyoshi, on the 
thirteenth day of the fourth month of the third year of An-gen at the first hour of the Dragon, (8. 
p.m.) they set out with the Mikoshi or sacred cars of the three shrines of Juzenji, Marodo, and 
Hachioji at their head, while with them went the priests of the gods and Buddhas from 
Sagarematsu, Kiretsuzumi, Kamo-no-kawara, Tadasu, Umetada, Yanagihara, Tohoku-in, and 
others with their monks and followers, an innumerable host. As they entered Ichijo from the 
western side, people wondered if the sun and moon had not fallen from heaven. Thereupon the 
Emperor ordered the generals of the houses of Gen and Hei to secure the four quarters of the 
Palace enclosure and to protect the city against the priestly multitude. Then Komatsu Naidaijin 
Sadaisho Shigemori with about three thousand horsemen secured the three gates of the Palace 
called Yomei, Taiken, and Yubo, while his younger brothers Munemori, Tomomori and Shigehira, 
with his uncles Yorimori and Tsunemori held the south western gates. Of the Genji, Gensammi 
Minamoto Yorimasa the Warden of the Palace with his retainers the Watanabe father and son, 
and about three hundred horsemen held the Nuidono Palace at the north gate. This position 
being an extensive one and the troops few, they presented a very scattered appearance, so that 
 
[p. 49] 
 
the priests, perceiving this to be the weakest point in the defences, determined to try and bring in 
their sacred emblem by the north gate. Then Yorimasa quickly leapt from his horse, and taking 
off his helmet and rinsing his mouth with water, made humble obeisance before the sacred 
emblem, all his three hundred retainers likewise following his example, after which he sent 
Watanabe Choshichi Tonau as an envoy to the priests. He was attired that day in a `'hitatare' of 
light green, and body armour ornamented with cherry blossoms on a yellow ground, and wore a 
sword with mounts of red copper; in his quiver he carried twenty four arrows feathered with 
white and under his arm was a bow lacquered in black and bound with red bands. Taking off his 
helmet he slung it over his shoulder by the thong, and standing reverently before the sacred car, 
spoke thus : " Be silent a while, I pray you, and hear my message from Gensammi Dono. The 
appeal of Hieizan to the Throne was certainly justified, and we also regret the slowness of the 
decision, so that not without reason do you bring hither your sacred car: Yorimasa however has 
but few men wherewith to hold this gate, and if you decide to force your way in at such an 
unguarded place you will he a laughing stock to the children of the city and it will be 
remembered to your shame in days to come. If we open the gate to you we shall be disobedient 
to the Imperial Order and if we try to defend it, I, who have always revered the god of Iozan, can 
no longer follow the way of the warrior. Truly either path is beset with difficulty. The eastern 
side is held in strong force by Komatsu Dono, so it is there that you ought to try and enter." 
 
On hearing this the priests hesitated and were undecided as to what to do, when some youthful 
and worthless ones among them cried out : " Wherefore do ye thus delay ; push on through the 
gate." As many took up this cry, an aged priest called Setsu-no-Rissha Ko-un, the wisest of all in 
the three halls, stood forth and said: " This request is very reasonable. If we break through the 
strongest place with our sacred car it will be greatly to our credit in time to come ; and moreover 
this Yorimasa is 
 
[p. 50] 
 
of the purest line of the Genji, descended from the sixth Imperial Grandson, having no equal in 
martial arts, and renowned not only as a warrior but also as a poet; for while Konoe-in was on the 
Throne, it happened that a verse-party was proposed at which the subject suggested for 
composition was, " Flowers in the recesses of the mountains; " and this theme embarrassed the 
verse-makers very much, but Yorimasa won great admiration from the Emperor by his famous 
improvisation ;  
 " Cherry boughs do not show 'mid the trees in the depths of the mountains ; 
But at the time of bloom, beauteous the flowers appear."  
Do not then let us put to shame one who has merited the Imperial admiration on an occasion like 
this. Let us carry in the sacred car elsewhere." Moved by this advice, thousands of the monks 
from front to rear shouted assent, and, forthwith carrying the sacred car round to the eastern side, 
made to enter the Palace through the Taiken gate. Here a struggle ensued, for the samurai drew 
their bows and shot at them so that many arrows struck the sacred car of Juzenji and some of the 
priests were killed, many of their followers being wounded, the noise of the shouts and groans 
ascending even to the Bonten Paradise, [1] while Kenro-Chijin, the mighty Earth deity, was struck 
with consternation. Then the priestly bands, leaving their sacred cars behind at the gate, fled back 
lamenting to their temples.  
 
CHAPTER XV. 
 
THE BURNING OF THE PALACE .  
 
 
That night the Retired Emperor gave orders to Kurodo-no-Sashoben Kanemitsu that a council of 
the Courtiers should be held immediately. At the time that they brought down the sacred cars 
before in the fourth month of the fourth year of Ho-an, the Emperor had ordered the Zasshu to 
take it into the 
 
[p. 51] 
 
shrine of Sekizan : also in the seventh month of the fourth year of Ho-en, he had ordered the 
Betto of Gion to bring it into the shrine of Gion ; now, according to the precedent of Ho-en, he 
ordered Gondai Sozu Choken, Betto of Gion, to bring it again to that shrine at nightfall, and this 
being done the arrows that stuck in it were pulled out by the priests. From of old, reckoning from 
the period of Ei-kyu, until now the priests of Hieizan have brought down their sacred car six 
times, but, though every time the samurai were ordered to restrain them, arrows had never been 
shot until this occasion. The people of the capital were greatly terrified, fearing that the anger of 
the god would bring calamity on the city.  
 
On the fourteenth day at midnight the monks of Hieizan again flocked down into the city, so the 
Emperor, ordering his palanquin in the middle of the night, went to the Retired Emperor's Palace 
at Hojuji-den, while the Imperial Consort and the other Ladies of the Palace went in their cars to 
some other palace, the Kwampaku and Dajo-daijin and other inferior Courtiers precipitately 
following them in a panic. The Naidaijin Komatsu Dono attended them wearing ordinary dress 
with a quiver of arrows on his back, his heir Gon-no-suke Koremori going with him in 
ceremonial costume carrying a flat quiver. Both in the Palace and in the city, high and low, rich 
and poor, all were in a state of confusion and tumult. 
 
Now at Hieizan three thousand priests met in council, clamouring that as their sacred car had 
been shot at and many of their company killed and wounded, they must burn all the temples 
from Omiya and Ninomiya to Kodo and Chudo as a protest against the indignity, and go forth 
and take up their abode on the mountain and moor. At this point it appeared that the Ho-o 
wished to propose something with regard to the matter, and the senior priests of Hieizan in 
Kyoto went to ascend the mountain to inform the others, but these came down in great numbers 
as far as Nishi-Sakamoto and drove them back again. Now Taira Dainagon Tokitada-no-Kyo, who 
at this time held 
 
[p. 52] 
 
the office of Saemon-no-kami, had been appointed one of the siding ministers (Jokei), and he was 
sent as an envoy to the monks ; these however assembled in the courtyard of the Daikodo and 
cried out; " let us seize Tokitada, pull off his 'Kammuri' and then bind him and throw him into 
the lake." On seeing this, Tokitada begged them to listen quietly to what he had to say, and taking 
a small ink-stone and paper from his bosom, he wrote a few words and gave it to them. What 
they read was this ; " The lawless violence of the priests is the work of a devil: a righteous 
monarch restrains it by virtue of his enlightened birth." Abashed by this reproof the monks 
forbore to lay hands on him, but admitting the truth of his statement with one accord, they all 
dispersed in silence to their cells and valleys. Thus did Tokitada-no-Kyo win the admiration of 
everyone by calming the wrath of the three thousand priests of the Three Halls by writing a few 
words on a piece of paper, and thus averting insult from the Emperor and himself. The monks 
too, who had hitherto been regarded as only wishing to stir up disorder, were now respected for 
their reasonable conduct. 
 
On the twentieth day an Imperial Mandate was issued through Kwazan-in-Gon Chunagon 
Tadachika-no-Kyo the Jokei that the Kokushi Kaga-no-kami Morotaka should be dismissed and 
banished to Idota in Owari and that his Brother Kondo Hangwan Morotsune should be 
imprisoned : also on the thirteenth day six samurai who had shot at the sacred car were also 
imprisoned ; they were all retainers of Komatsu Dono. 
 
On the evening of the twentieth day at the hour of the Dog (8. p.m.), a fire broke out at Higuchi 
Tomi-no-koji and a great part of Kyoto was burned. A south-east wind was blowing strongly at 
the time and the flames swept across the city diagonally like a great wheel and burned through to 
the south-west, the distance of from three to five cho : a very terrible sight deed. Guhei Shinno's 
palace at Chigusa, the Kobai palace at Kitano Tenjin, Ritsu Issei's palace at Haematsu, the Oni 
palace, the Takamatsu palace, the Kamoi palace, the Kanin palace of 
 
[p. 53] 
 
Higashi Sanjo Fuyutsugu-no-Otodo, the Horikawa palace of Fujiwara Mototsune, beside thirty 
other palaces famous from ancient days. Sixteen palaces belonging to Court Nobles of the highest 
rank were burned, beside those of other Courtiers and high officials without number. At last the 
fire reached the Imperial Palace, and starting from the Shujaku gate, the Oten gate, the Kaisho 
gate, the Daikoku-den, the Buraku-in, the eight offices [1] of the Palace administration and the 
Office of Records were all reduced to ashes in a moment ; the annals of families and the 
documents of many generations beside many treasures of great worth were all burnt to cinders. 
No one could estimate the damage. Several hundred people were burnt to death and cattle 
without number. Moreover it was no ordinary event that there were some who dreamed of two 
or three thousand great monkeys coming down from Hieizan with torches to set fire to the city 
as a punishment from the god of that place. 
 
The Daikyokuden was burned for the first time in the age of Seiwa Tenno in the eighteenth year 
of Jokan, and on the third day of the first month of the nineteenth year the Coronation 
Ceremony of the Emperor Yosei took place in the Buraku-in. On the ninth day of the fourth 
month of the first year of Gwankyo they began to rebuild it, and it was finished on the eighth day 
of the tenth month of the second year. In the reign of Go-Reizei-in, on the twenty sixth day of 
the second month of the fifth year of Tenki it was again burned and on the fourteenth day of the 
eighth month of the fourth year of Jiryaku they again began to rebuild it, but the Emperor Go-
Reizei died before it was finished. In the reign of Go-Sanjo-in on the fifteenth day of the fourth 
month of the fourth year of Enkyu it was finished, and the Imperial Court removed to it, the 
literary men dedicating many compositions and the musicians making melody. As the present age 
was a degenerate one and the strength of the country was exhausted, it has not yet been rebuilt.  
